The game mechanics around strike and dodge don't seem quite there yet. The
immediate problem is that monster dodge values are currently flat and pretty
low. This means a non-stupid player almost always gets the first blow, which
almost always hits. That in turn means that once the hero gets a weapon that can
one-hit-kill a monster, the monster's difficult instantly plummets. So, at least
in the very early game, the threat level of monsters varies wildly based on when
the hero finds a starting weapon.

More vaguely, it might be nice if dodge ability was part of the flavor for
monsters, so that some monsters were noticeably harder to hit than others.

Defining a specific dodge value for each breed is an option, though I'm worried
about the tuning cost of yet another statistic to author for every breed.

I tried this approach:

- Define a handful of size classes: tiny, small, medium, large, huge.
- Each size class has a base dodge value where smaller monsters are harder to
  hit.
- That is then scaled by the monster's speed and whether or not it's immobile
  or flies.

The problem with that is that early game monsters tend to be smaller, but this
made them paradoxically much *harder*.

I don't think I have a clear picture about what I'm hoping to accomplish with
strike/dodge. A few questions:

A1. What is the mechanic trying to accomplish in gameplay?
A2. How does it scale throughout the game? Is it relatively flat or do heroes
    need to continually increase their strike ability to handle the fact that
    monsters continually increase the dodge?
A3. What does it represent in the world of the game?

For A1, I had/have a few things in mind:

B1. It somewhat balances out the otherwise too strong benefit of hitting first.
    Since it's usually tactically easy for the player to ensure they get the
    first hit, that would otherwise be overpowered.

B2. It provides a defensive value that scales independently of damage. Since a
    miss cancels out 100% of the damage, increasing dodge reduces the aggregate
    damage an actor takes by an amount proportional to the damage. Though armor
    is itself proportional too, so this isn't really useful.

B3. Adds a little randomness to combat. A chance of doing zero damage basically
    increases the random damage range so that combat is less of a war of
    attrition.

B4. I haven't taken advantage of this yet, but it's an opportunity to add flavor
    to both monsters and hero development. A hero could improve their defensive
    capabilities by absorbing more damage (heavy armor, high health) like a tank
    or by avoiding it (high dodge) like a nimble ninja. Monsters could be hard
    to kill because they are huge lumps of meat (giant) or because it's hard to
    lay a hand on one (sprite).

B1 is important, but difficult. You can balance out the first-move advantage
more by increasing the baseline chance to miss for both monsters and heroes, but
it tends to make combat more annoying when lots of blows miss.

I don't think B2 has any point since armor scales as well.

B3 is probably more important than I realize. We could improve this by also
adding something like critical hits too.

---

OK, so here's a stab at answering the questions:

A1. Mostly balancing out first-move advantage and adding flavor. Varying the
    dodge value of various monsters also means that there is different relative
    advantage to improve the hero's strike roll, or choosing other ways of
    hurting the monster than melee.

    For example, a hero that's focused on high strike and can hit anything they
    want would not be afraid of nimble, tricky-to-touch monsters but is
    relatively less able to deal with big tanks that are easy to hit anyway but
    can suck up a lot of damage. A hero that has mediocre strike but deals a
    lot of damage may find it not worth their time to try to kill smaller,
    nimble monsters.

A2. I think it should be fairly flat. Health is the main scaling factor. You
    shouldn't need to have a +60 to strike in order to touch a giant late in
    the game. It's a giant.

    Equipment that grants strike bonuses are nice and useful, but not necessary.
    Skills that increase strike are also useful, but not something that you
    should *need* to level up to survive.

    Non-melee heroes may beat the game with almost no strike bonuses.

A3. My current idea is that it represents all of an actor's abilities to avoid
    taking damage. That's being too small to hit, evading the blow, having it
    glance off a shield, bounce off a dragon's scales, etc.

Building on A3, it might be neat to actually call out each of those separately.
So an actor provides a set of "shields": each one has a description and a dodge
bonus. If a strike roll fails, we figure out which shield it hit and use that
for the "miss" message.

This also opens a way to add "parrying" as a hero skill -- it adds an extra
"shield" for parrying with the current weapon.

