https://www.reddit.com/r/roguelikedev/comments/7kn5it/lighting_mechanics/drgcnjy/

Totally agree on the tedium and urgency aspect. And I agree with the increase in
the danger level. If adding light sources to the game just adds another
aggressive "hunger clock", I don't think it's a good addition. It's just one
more thing that the RNG can fail to give you that seals your doom.

I do like light source visual effects in games. It's evocative.

Having a too-small light radius is annoying. It does feel claustrophobic, but
the fact that it makes you take your world step by step makes the game feel
much, much slower. Your game isn't one of those long-form roguelikes (yet?) but
even still, this sort of thing really changes the pacing in a way that I
personally don't care for. I kind of like being able to zip around the dungeons
and have the freedom to double-back. That can be achieved even with light
sources if there are enough light sources available AND the radius is
sufficiently large for it to not be too much of an issue.

Like you, I do like the idea of light sources being boons that you can find. I
think what I'd prefer in that vein, though, is that light is usually not an
issue, but then some special circumstances makes it an issue. In other words,
instead of the default being darkness and you have to work (and rely on the RNG)
to make light, you could make the default be light (or very generous RNG light
source drops), and have certain monsters or rooms or set-pieces create dark
situations that it you need to explicitly light. I think of it like keys for
chests; you might not be able to open all the chests you find, so finding keys
is a boon. Similarly, you might not be able to reliably traverse dark areas you
find, so finding a light source is a boon.

I also like the idea of light sources helping to find secret passages, but
again, it would be a pain for that to be a consumable resource that you have to
expend - perhaps fruitlessly - as you walk around looking for that passage you
know must be around there somewhere. If it were required to find the secret
passage, that would be an arbitrarily limiting factor, which puts us at the
RNG's mercy again, so it would be better if it were a bonus.

Some other uses for light: Blinding enemies with a brilliant flash of light.
Enemies that try to stay in the shadows so you will need to extinguish your main
light source in order to encounter them. Enemies that get negatives to fight you
in bright light. Enemies that cast darkness spells. Enemies that have
regeneration while they are in the dark, so you have to try to keep them in the
light while you fight them. Enemies that can "shadewalk", teleporting to any
tile in shadow. Giant insect creatures that are docile but attracted
aggressively towards light. Enemies that are invisible in shadow. Enemies that
are invisible in light (but perhaps cast dim shadows). Traps that trigger when
they detect a light source of enough intensity. Traps that trigger when a shadow
crosses them.
