The simplest option is to just create a separate tree of priest skills that
work more or less like another school of magic. The difference between priests
and mages would be just the set of spells, but the overall play style and
mechanics would be the same.

The more complex, but maybe more interesting option is to have a whole separate
set of mechanics around deities and then have priests focus on that. Here's a
sketch: There are a set of gods. Each one has its own rules for what it does
and does not approve of. When the hero does things the diety likes, its favor
increases. If they do things it doesn't like, its favor goes down.

Examples of things gods may approve or disapprove of:

- Wielding certain kinds of weapons. Classic example: no edged weapons allowed.
- Killing certain kinds of monsters: Example: killing undead is good. Killing
  living people bad.
- Using certain kinds of items. Could even have "totems" and other items that
  exist solely to please the god by carrying them around.
- Using certain skills.
- Refraining from learning or leveling certain skills.
- Other stuff?

This favor could then impact the hero in some way. Here's an idea: Some skills
have their level capped by the hero's favor level of some God. So you must
curry the God's favor in order to learn and increase the skill. If you later
displease the God, the skill levels are dropped.

Compared to other skills, these could be more powerful since they require the
player to make other sacrifices.

This is a general mechanic available to all heroes, so you don't have to opt
out of all of other mechanics by caring about favor and trying to learn those
skills. You could be an archer-paladin, a magical monk, etc. At the same time,
if you don't care about the Gods, you can ignore favor entirely if you don't
care to learn the associated skills.

Have to come up with a set of gods and try to make them interesting and
distinct compared to the mages schools. A few examples:

- Typical RPG one: No blades, no evil, hate undead. Gives protection spells and
  spells that harm undead.
- God of war: Killing is good. Safety and defense bad. Gives bloodlust and
  makes more deadly warrior.
- Druidic nature god. Killing natural beasts bad. Metal weapons and armor bad.
  Magical and undead monsters bad. Killing them good. Gives control over nature.

Would be fun to come up with some weirder more quirky gods. Shouldn't be as
"logical" as the magic schools.

http://crawl.chaosforge.org/Piety
