Here's an idea for how to get regions and stuff in the dungeon to feel locally
consistent and to get a feel for "I'm heading towards an area of ___".

We can have a grid of "theme" data for the stage. Biomes can seed that with
base themes like "water".

When a monster is spawned, it may prefer to be in certain themes. (Or,
conversely, when choosing a monster to spawn, we take the theme of the place
into account.) When a monster is placed, it may paint some of the surrounding
area with its own theme. So spawning an undead monster will taint the nearby
area. Later spawns in the region are more likely to also be undead.

Floor drops and furnishings take theme into account in their weights. Likewise,
a furnishing may also paint theme. A laboratory decoration paints a "magical"
theme which makes magic-using monsters more likely to spawn.

---

OK, so what are the actual real gameplay experience goals around themes and
furnishing and stuff?

1. To have some foreshadowing where the contents of one room hint to the player
   about biomes, monsters, and treasure that they'll find as they continue.

2. To make it feel like the dungeon was created by intelligent entities where
   different regions have some larger logic and consistency and each room isn't
   its own island.

3. To make it feel like monsters actually inhabit the dungeon by having breeds
   make sense for the surrounding decoration.

4. Likewise, to have some sense of larger flow between breeds in one area and
   nearby ones.

5. To fill rooms with decorations that help evoke and reinforce the fantasy
   setting and give a sense of place.

6. To put in decorations that make rooms more tactically interesting for combat.

7. To generate a combinatorial explosion of decorations and themes so that it
   does feel like once you've seen the ten room templates, you've seen them all.

8. To increase the perceived richness and variety of dungeons.

The last four are about making each individual place more interesting. The first
four are about structure that spans multiple places. I've been assuming I'd use
the same mechanism for both, but now that I think about that, it's not strictly
necessary.

I'm mostly focused on monsters and decor, but floor items play into this too.

The challenges I've been struggling with are:

- How specific are the themes and what are they? Is "chair" a theme? "kobold
  chieftain"? "laboratory?" "dead end room?"

  For placing breeds, I think you want pretty specific themes so that a boss
  monster has similar henchmen nearby.

  But for the rooms themselves, all we know at the beginning is the size and
  number of junctions. Many decorations like tables and chairs aren't
  particularly specific in and of themselves.

- What order to I generate things in? Choosing a decoration, breed, or item
  should take the themes into account, but it can also affect the themes. So
  what are the seeds that it starts from and what order do they grow?

  So far, I've been looking at room dimensions to put a few very basic themes,
  then trying to use those to place decorations, and then (not implemented yet)
  using that for picking breeds.

  Right now, it feels really difficult to come up with themes for mostly-blank
  rooms, and the self-reinforcing nature causes weird problems. For example,
  once a room gets a fountain -- which makes it more aquatic -- it tends to
  attract more fountains.

One tempting approach is to have a long list of specific room themes -- throne
room, laboratory, storeroom, etc. Simply pick one for each room and then choose
decorations and breeds that fit that.

But I'm fairly certain that doing so will lead to very boring predictable
dungeons once you've seen each of the room types. Ideally, I'd do something
more bottom-up, emergent, and combinatorial.

Breeds might help. Even with a fixed set of room themes, if a breed affects the
breeds chosen for neighboring rooms, you still get a bit more of a combination
of experiences.

I wonder if it's enough to simply sometimes choose two themes for a room and/or
to randomly sometimes pick out-of-theme furnishings and breeds.

OK, so here's something to try:

1.  Generate the biomes as usual.

2.  For each room, from largest to smallest.

    Pick a theme for the room. Use the dimensions, number of exits, and themes
    of neighboring rooms to influence this choice. For example, a small room
    with one exit that is a larger room with the "throneroom" theme is more
    likely to be a treasure room.

    Occasionally pick two themes for the room.

3.  Each furnishing has a list of themes it can be found in. Go through each
    room and pick appropriate furnishings. Occasionally pick out-of-theme ones.

4.  Each breed has a list of themes where it can be found. Go through each room
    from largest to smallest and place spawns. If an out of depth breed is
    spawned, mark the room itself as out of depth and mark adjacent rooms as
    having that boss breed nearby.

    If a room has been marked with a nearby boss, sometimes try to choose
    matching breeds.

5.  Place floor items taking the room's out-of-depthness and theme into account.

---

Hmm, that feels kind of hand-wavey.

Maybe another way think about the goals is:

1. Foreshadowing. Hints to the player about something dramatic to come: a boss
   fight, interesting biome, unusual room, or exciting treasure. Gives them a
   more informed choice about whether to press ahead, choose a different path,
   rest and recuperate, etc.

2. Narrative flow across multiple places. You defeat the boss which gives
   access to rooms full of treasure. A hidden passageway opens up to a secret
   treasure. A weird door unlocks a strange realm. A series of increasingly
   strong minions serve as gatekeepers to the ultimate boss.

   Increases the player's emotional investment in the outcome of a session. The
   sense that the game is telling them something.

3. Thematic coherence. Wizards in laboratories with potions, rats in storerooms
   with food. Demons in torture chambers with whips. Makes level feel more real,
   but, more pragmatically, it gives the player some control over the monsters
   and treasures they encounter. Don't want to deal with frogs and snakes? Stay
   away from the river.

Gameplay isn't the end-all be-all, but I do think it's useful to couch themes
in terms of how they affect the actual play experience. Right now, opening a
door feels like a totally random roll of the dice, which isn't fun because it
forces the player to make an uninformed choice.

1 and 2 here are specifically about giving the player some more information
about where they are going.

To accomplish 1 and 2, we need some structure larger than a single place. Part
of 1 may be just having themes bleed through the place graph like we do for
the aquatic theme and water biomes.

We could do something similar for monsters. When placing an out-of-depth or
unique monster, bleed its type out into the nearby places and preferentially
spawn minions of that monster's breed. We might want to expand the notion of
minion so that we aren't always directly spawning a monster and minions at the
same time as well.

2 is more complex, because it's more than just "nearby places are similar". For
that, one idea is to define a number of "narratives". Each takes looks for a
subset of the place graph with a certain shape (connectivity, place dimensions)
and assigns roles to each place. Those roles then affect how the places are
populated.

Narrative examples:

*   "Treasure guardian". Looks for a large room with one or more dead-end rooms
    connected to it. Places a boss (out of depth or unique) monster in the large
    room and then extra treasure in the dead end rooms.

*   "Secret treasure". Looks for a dead-end room far from the starting room.
    Makes its door hidden and then puts extra treasure in the room.

*   "Entrace to the underworld". Looks for a large number of rooms that are
    connected to the starting room through one single path. Marks the entrance
    to that path (hidden door, special door, etc.) and then themes all of the
    reachable rooms similar to each other and different from the rest of the
    dungeon.

*   "Gatekeepers". Looks for a room that can only be reached by a single path
    from the starting room. Places successively strong monsters of the same
    style along that path.

*   "Shortcut". Looks for a room that can be reached along two paths, one
    shorter than the other. Puts a hidden door along the shorter path and a
    stronger monster on the longer.

Some of these are probably too specific. We might not need that many. A single
dungeon could contain more than one of these, or none. Possibly overlapping.

OK, so the data we want to make this works is something like:

*   A set of breeds. Each breed has:

    *   Zero or more minions: other weaker breeds that often occur when this
        breed appears.

    *   One or more themes that define the "flavor" or "kind" of monster it is.
        Themes are organized hierarchically. So, a cat might have:

        animal/feline
        magic/familiar
        nature/forest

        And a kobold wizard might have:

        humanoid/goblin/kobold
        magic/wizard

*   A set of narratives.

*   A set of decor. Like furnishings, each is a template that can be stamped
    out. Each also has a list of themes that it is associated with.

*   A set of floor drops. Each has a list of themes.

So maybe the process looks something like:

1.  Generate the biomes as usual. Calculate connectivity between places.

2.  Apply and spread themes from the biomes. Each place has a list of themes
    and weights for each theme. Biomes can seed this with themes, which then
    bleed out to neighboring places.

3.  Apply narratives. A random number of times, pick a random narrative and look
    for a set of places to apply it to on the graph. When a match is found,
    "placing it" means, concretely, for each affected place:

    * Mark it with one or more breeds.
    * Give it a monster weight -- the number of / chance of spawning monsters
      in this place. Higher weight means more of or more likely.
    * Give it an item weight, same but for items.
    * Mark how out of depth the monsters should be.
    * Mark how out of depth the items should be.

    For example, "treasure guardian" would give the boss room a higher weight
    for monsters, and make them out of depth. The treasure rooms would have the
    same breed (for them consistency), low monster weight, and high item weight
    and out of depth-ness.

4.  Populate with breeds. For each place, a number of time based on the place's
    size and monster weight (at least once):

    1.  Pick a random breed based on depth + the place's monster out of depth.
        Prefer breeds that agree with one of the room's biome themes, if any.
        Probably something like a random chance to discard a breed that doesn't
        agree with the biome, weighted by the biome theme's strength.

    2.  Add the breed's minions to the place and/or spread to nearby places.
        Maybe a short random walk through the place graph or something.

        TODO: Should it transitively walk the minion graph? Do we place a
        minion's minions too? Might be nice.

5.  Decorate the places. A certain number of times:

    1.  Pick a random place weighted by its size.

    2.  Pick a theme from one of its breeds. Like picking items, the theme
        choice has a random chance to walk up the hierarchy to more general ones
        so that things aren't overly constrained.

        TODO: Possibly pick a theme directly from the biome themes too?

    3.  Pick a random decor that has that theme. Apply it.

5.  Populate the places. For each place.

    1.  Spawn a number of monsters based on the size of the place and the
        monster weight using the place's list of breeds.

    2.  Spawn a number of floor drops. Again take item weight, item out of
        depth, and themes into account.

The little dance where we pick breeds, decorate, then go back and spawn monsters
is to deal with two tensions:

1. We want to pick monsters before decor because monsters are more usefully
   specific when it comes to theming. It's easier to say "dwarves tend to imply
   tables and a smithing furnace" than "a chair implies...". A lot of decor is
   too vague to be actionable, where monsters are very precise tangible things.

2. We need to make sure placing decor doesn't strand monsters in impassable
   tiles.

So we pick the breeds to get 1, then decorate the empty place, then use those
same breeds to spawn and place monsters.

---

Started hacking on the above, but it's really complex and feels kind of weird.
Treating breeds as implicit room themes didn't feel as natural as I hoped.
Here's a simpler idea:

1.  Generate the biomes as usual. Calculate connectivity between places.

2.  Let biomes apply themes to places. Each biome has its own logic. For
    aquatic, it just bleeds the themes outward from the aquatic places.

    The room places are more complex. Have a bunch of room themes: "laboratory",
    "closet", "throne room", etc. Each has some requirements around size,
    aspect ratio, connectivity, etc. For each room, pick a weighted random
    theme that fits the requirements. Probably have depth come into play too.

    Many rooms may just get a generic "room" theme which permits lots of
    monsters. Everything doesn't have to be strongly flavored. Possibly pick
    two room themes for some rooms (or allow bleeding to cover this).

    For some themes, spread that around a bit.

    Also consider multi-room theme groups. So, for example, a large room with
    a couple of dead-end rooms connected to it could get a "boss" theme and
    then turn the dead-end rooms into treasure chambers.

    Maybe do the narrative stuff above too where we paint monster density, item
    density, and out-of-depthness onto places.

    Basically, there's a bunch of different heuristics and ways we can paint
    one or more theme weights onto places.

3.  Decorate the places. A certain number of times:

    1.  Pick a random place weighted by its size.

    2.  Pick one of its themes by weight. Like picking items, the theme choice
        has a random chance to walk up the hierarchy to more general ones so
        that things aren't overly constrained.

    3.  Pick a random decor that has that theme. Apply it.

4.  Populate with monsters. For each place, a number of time based on the
    place's size and monster weight (at least once):

    1.  Pick one of its themes by weight.

    2.  Pick a random breed based on depth + the place's monster out of depth
        that allows that theme.

    3.  Spawn the breed and its minions. Minions have some random chance to
        escape to neighboring places.

5.  Populate with items. For each place:

    1.  Spawn a number of floor drops. Again take item weight, item out of
        depth, and themes into account.

That's pretty straightforward, I think. It doesn't strongly tie a monster to
nearby rooms and treasure. For example, a boss guarding a separate treasure
room won't produce treasure in that other room that matches the boss. Aside
from minions wandering a bit, there aren't real "guardian" types.

So there's room to refine this, but let's start with the above and see how it
goes.
